# Impossible comparison of interface value with untyped nil

Under the covers, interfaces are implemented as two elements, a
type T and a value V. V is a concrete value such as an int,
struct or pointer, never an interface itself, and has type T. For
instance, if we store the int value 3 in an interface, the
resulting interface value has, schematically, (T=int, V=3). The
value V is also known as the interface's dynamic value, since a
given interface variable might hold different values V (and
corresponding types T) during the execution of the program.

An interface value is nil only if the V and T are both
unset, (T=nil, V is not set), In particular, a nil interface will
always hold a nil type. If we store a nil pointer of type *int
inside an interface value, the inner type will be *int regardless
of the value of the pointer: (T=*int, V=nil). Such an interface
value will therefore be non-nil even when the pointer value V
inside is nil.

This situation can be confusing, and arises when a nil value is
stored inside an interface value such as an error return:

    func returnsError() error {
        var p *MyError = nil
        if bad() {
            p = ErrBad
        }
        return p // Will always return a non-nil error.
    }

If all goes well, the function returns a nil p, so the return
value is an error interface value holding (T=*MyError, V=nil).
This means that if the caller compares the returned error to nil,
it will always look as if there was an error even if nothing bad
happened. To return a proper nil error to the caller, the
function must return an explicit nil:

    func returnsError() error {
        if bad() {
            return ErrBad
        }
        return nil
    }

It's a good idea for functions that return errors always to use
the error type in their signature (as we did above) rather than a
concrete type such as *MyError, to help guarantee the error is
created correctly. As an example, os.Open returns an error even
though, if not nil, it's always of concrete type *os.PathError.

Similar situations to those described here can arise whenever
interfaces are used. Just keep in mind that if any concrete value
has been stored in the interface, the interface will not be nil.
For more information, see The Laws of
Reflection (https://golang.org/doc/articles/laws_of_reflection.html).

This text has been copied from
https://golang.org/doc/faq#nil_error, licensed under the Creative
Commons Attribution 3.0 License.

Available since
    2020.2

Online documentation
    https://staticcheck.io/docs/checks#SA4023
